Hi and welcome back.
In this video we're talking about JSON files.
JSON is probably one of the most if not the most
popular format for data in the world.
Especially extremely popular for web applications,
and that's because JSON comes from
the most popular web language, JavaScript.
Indeed, JSON stands for JavaScript object notation.
Here's what some JSON could look like.
You've got some sort of curly braces
at the start and at the end, then you've got a key,
around it then our double quotation marks,
that's important, and then you've got a colon,
and you can have a value associated with that key.
Does it remind you of anything in Python?
I hope that it reminds you of a dictionary,
because it looks pretty similar to a dictionary,
in fact it looks the same as a dictionary.
There are just a couple of differences
between JSON, that is this thing here,
and a Python dictionary.
The first and most important difference
is something you have to remember
whenever you deal with JSON, and that is
that JSON is a string, notice how this piece
of JSON here is inside a text file,
and what are the contents of text files?
That's correct, all the contents of text files
are strings, as we saw when we read our CSV file,
and as we saw when we read our plain old data file.
Text files always contain strings only.
When we read this it will be a string,
and we will convert it into a Python dictionary.
The second difference is that JSON must always
use double quotation marks and not single quotation marks.
So if you do this, which is perfectly valid in Python,
it will not be valid JSON, so don't do that.
And some programmes that read and write JSON
require that the outermost element here, the outermost
construct, the outermost structure, be an object.
This thing here that we call a dictionary in Python
is an object in JavaScript, they're very similar.
When talking about JSON, the structure
with these curly braces we call it an object,
because that's what it's called in JavaScript,
I know that in Python they're called dictionaries.
Some programmes however, and that's important,
don't have this requirement, so in some programmes,
you could have a file called friendsJSON.txt,
that is just this, and this would be okay for some programmes.
And notice how the indentation here
is slightly off, and let me fix it real quick.
This would be okay for some programmes but not others.
Some have the requirement that the outermost structure
be an object, that's a dictionary,
some do not have this requirement, and this would be fine.
For our example, we are going to stick
with our object as the outermost structure.
So let's read some JSON using Python.
Python comes with a built in module
that you can import and use called the JSON module.
We're going to talk a lot more about importing
as we move on in this section,
we're going to be importing our own files and modules
as well as system modules, so let's start
with importing the JSON module.
But before we import the JSON module itself,
let's talk a little bit about importing.
The first thing I'm going to do is create a new file
that I'm going to call something like JSON import.
Important, do not call this file JSON,
because the JSON module already exists in Python,
we're going to import it like so.
So if you call your file JSON,
that's going to confuse Python.
Try to not have your files or any of your packages
named after something that already exists in Python,
or indeed try not to have duplicate names for files
on things like that, just a general piece of advice there.
So in Python, as we've done a couple of times
before in the course, sort of glanced
over it, we can import things.
And these things are code that other developers
have written so that we don't have to write it ourselves.
And now we're importing the JSON module,
which contains some functions that allow us
to import the JSON file and convert it
into a dictionary, and also to go the other way around,
turn a dictionary into JSON data.
Remember JSON data is very much
like a dictionary, but it is a string.
And remember that someone did write this JSON module,
in the same way that we are writing this file,
and somebody wrote all the other built in functions
in Python, like len, or sum, or even like
things like print, all of these have been written
by someone, and they are made available to us
to use globally in all our Python files.
The only difference is that this JSON module
is not included by default on all your files,
because whoever created Python
thought that it may not be necessary in all cases.
So the JSON module is a module that comes with Python,
but it is not a global module.
We must make it explicit that we want to use it
by importing it at the top of the file like so.
So we've created a file that contains our friends as JSON,
and notice how this is a friends key,
and that is associated with a list,
and that contains three objects inside of it.
I'm gonna try really hard to call these objects
when I'm talking about JSON, and dictionaries
when I'm talking about Python,
but please bear with me if I do make any mistakes.
These are objects in JSON, dictionaries in Python,
but only when we import them using the JSON module.
Then, we've got the JSON file, sorry,
the JSON module imported, and now we have the ability
to do things like JSON dot, and access,
as long as you're using PyCharm or something else
that will recommend functions,
we can access the functions in that module.
Notice how this JSON module is not an object,
it's not a class, because we didn't have to
create a new JSON object in order to access things.
This module here allows us to use some functions,
but they are not inside a class.
And indeed, in PyCharm you can go
into the JSON module, by clicking Command + click,
or Control + click if you're on Windows,
and you can see the source code of the module here.
You can see that a lot of it is these comments
that tell you how to use the functions,
but primarily there are some functions definitions,
like dump, and you can see the source code
and what it does, you've dump S, and you can see
the arguments, and the source code
and all the comments and everything there.
So as you can see this is just code,
like the one we write, except we didn't
write it, but we can still import it.
And notice how as we go through the file
these functions are at the lowest level
of indentation, they are at the very left,
which means they are not inside a class.
So as we import the module, we'll have
access to those functions directly.
Okay, feel free to read through that module if you want,
if you wanna have a wee look at what is in there,
but we are going to be using only
a couple of functions in this video.
The first thing you need is a file pointer.
For that, we're going to use the open function of course,
and we have to use an equals sign, and we're going to open
the friends_JSON.txt for reading,
so you know how to do that, friends_JSON.txt,
in reading mode, then we're going to load the contents.
The way to do that is to file contents for example,
it's JSON.load, of the file pointer.
So the load function inside the JSON module takes in
a file pointer that it's going to load the JSON from.
As part of reading the file, by the way,
this reads the entire file, it also turns it
into a dictionary, so now file contents is a dictionary.
Reads file and turns it to dictionary.
Then of course we can close the file,
and now we can use the file contents
for whatever we want, for example,
we can print file contents friends, zero.
And that should print this dictionary here.
Okay, remember if you're using PyCharm,
you may be tempted to press the top right play button,
but it's likely that that's gonna play the wrong file,
CSV_read in this case, so if that's the case,
just right click the JSON import file, and run it.
And there you have it, we print out the dictionary
with name Jose and degree applied computing.
That's what I studied at university.
And this is how you load a JSON file into a dictionary
that you can then use as normal,
so here we're accessing the friends key, and then we're
accessing the zeroth element of the friends key.
If you wanted to do the opposite,
and you want to write a Python dictionary
as a JSON file, that's also something you can do.
For example, we are going to write into a file
called cars_JSON, so we're gonna do
cars equal this list here of dictionaries.
And by the way, something I tend to do,
just because I programme a lot on JavaScript
is have this space after the dictionary.
And Python doesn't really like that,
so if I do that I apologise, I just find it
a bit more readable, but that's just because
I do a lot of JavaScript and that's
a convention in JavaScript as well.
So now we have two dictionaries inside our list,
and of course as I said earlier,
we can totally save this as JSON,
it doesn't need to have a dictionary enclosing it,
although some programmes may request that you have that.
So again, if you want to save this to a dictionary,
you know exactly what to do, open the file,
save the contents into the file, and then close it.
How you're gonna save the contents?
Instead of JSON.load, you're gonna use JSON.dump.
So here's what you have to do.
Go and investigate how to use JSON.dump.
Or optionally, just wait until after I ask you,
pause the video and you try this yourself,
and I will implement this for you.
If you are so inclined, pause the video now
and give this a go, investigate how to use JSON.dump,
and then save this list into a new file
that you can call cars_JSON.txt.
I'll see you in a few seconds.
I hope you got that, if you did go and investigate
JSON.dump, congratulations, well done,
by investigating you're gonna learn faster.
And there are multiple ways you could have investigated,
you could have Googled JSON.dump Python,
and one of those first few links
would be the official Python documentation.
Another option, you could have gone
into the JSON module with Command + click
if you're on Mac, or Control + click
if you're on Windows, and then you could have found
this documentation here for the dump function,
then it tells you what it does.
It serialises the obj parameter
as a JSON formatted string to fp,
A .write supporting file-like object.
Now I appreciate this is some lingo
that we've got here, serialising means turning to a string.
Fp is normally a file pointer, and it tells you
here that it has to be a file-like
object that allows you to do .write.
That's what we've been doing with our text files
when we've been writing to them.
So, this dump takes in a object, and that's gonna
get turned into a string and saved into fp.
Therefore, if we go back to our JSON import,
what we have to do, is open the file,
in write mode this time, and then say JSON.dump,
cars, and file, and then of course file.close.
Let's run that, notice how it runs,
cars_JSON gets created, and it contains our dumped JSON.
Notice though it's not nicely formatted, and that's fine.
JSON doesn't need any new lines or spaces
or anything like that, all of these
are completely optional, just notice how it's used
double quotation marks, as that is important even though
we used single quotation marks in our dictionaries.
Python does not care for our strings,
whether we use double or single quotation marks,
but JSON does, so it uses that.
If you had a string variable that you wanted
to turn into a dictionary, you can do that,
for example let's say my JSON string is something like this.
This is completely wrong by the way,
I know very little about cars,
let's say you've got this JSON string
of this Alfa Romeo car that was released in 1950,
probably pretty wrong, I'm guessing it's more like
much later, but none the less, let's say
you have this JSON string here,
and you wanna turn it into a dictionary.
You can do that, but this time,
instead of using load, that turns a JSON file
into a dictionary, we're gonna use load S, for load string.
So, incorrect car is going to be JSON.loads,
and notice how the first argument is a string,
or rather S, which stands for string,
and that's gonna be my JSON string,
and then you can print incorrect car name, Bane.
We're going Batman here, name, there we go.
Then you can print that, oh sorry,
it's in a list, so of course you have to access
element zero first, my bad, if you noticed that,
well done, and there you have Alfa Romeo printed out.
So load S allows you to turn a JSON string
into a dictionary, and of course dump S
allows you to turn a dictionary into a string,
pretty straightforward to use,
I won't give you an example of that,
'cause if you have a dictionary,
or a JSON thing, like this one, like this list,
or a dictionary, you can use dump S to turn
whatever construct you've got into JSON, a JSON string.
So JSON allows you to use lists and dictionaries,
it does not allow you to use topples.
So that's important, just make sure to use lists
and dictionaries, don't use topples,
you can use pretty much anything else,
like strings, and numbers, floats,
and the JSON module will automatically call
the repr function, the dunder repr function of your object,
if you choose to include any object in here,
generally though try to avoid objects in a JSON,
just because when you load them up,
it's just gonna be a string and it's gonna be
really difficult to understand what's going on.
So if you want to turn your objects into JSON,
which we will do shortly, make sure that you
describe your objects using a dictionary.
For example you can make a dictionary
out of the object's variable properties and their values.
That way you can then export your objects
as JSON string if you want to.
If you don't know what I'm talking about, that's fine,
we're going to be doing just that,
exporting our objects as JSON later on in the course,
and even some other courses I've got
we use things like that as well.
So it's a pretty popular approach
to turn objects and to turn your variables
into JSON so that you can save them into files,
read them nicely, and also so you can send them
over the internet, 'cause that's
a popular thing to do with JSON.
Alright, so that's enough of that,
we've looked at CSVs and JSON,
they're two very popular ways of storing data,
JSON much more popular for sending data
over the internet, another we're able
to read and write data in this variety of formats,
we are good to start creating apps
that persist data into a disc,
save data into our disc, and allows it
to store it between it's run times.
In the next section we're going to be creating
a nice project, but now I wanted to move on to
a couple other things, like importing
our own files and our own modules,
just so you can start dividing your programme
into constituent parts, as opposed
to having everything in a single file.
This is pretty important whenever you're creating
a larger app, you're going to be dividing it
into multiple files, so knowing how to interact
between those two and how the imports work
in a lower level is going to be really important.
With that said, let's move on to the next video.
I'll see you there.